Jukun (Njikum) are an ethno-linguistic group or ethnic nation in West Africa. The Jukun are traditionally located in Taraba, Benue, Nasarawa, Plateau, Adamawa, and Gombe States in Nigeria and parts of northwestern Cameroon. They are descendants of the people of Kwararafa. Most of the tribes in the north central of Nigeria trace their origin to the Jukun people and are related in one way or the other to the Jukuns. Until the coming of both Christianity and Islam, the Jukun people were followers of their own traditional religions. Most of the tribes, Alago, Agatu, Rendere, Goemai in Shendam, and others left Kwararafa when it disintegrated as a result of a power tussle. The Jukuns are divided into two major groups the Jukun Wanu and Jukun Wapa The Jukun Wanu are fishermen residing along the banks of the river Benue and Niger where they run through Taraba State, Benue State and Nasarawa State. The Wukari Federation, headed by the Aku Uka of Wukari, is now the main centre of the Jukun people.

Population and demographics.
Writing in the late 1920s, the British anthropologist C. K. Meek estimated that there were approximately 25,000 Jukun-speakers then alive. Meek noted that the majority of the Jukun lived in scattered groups around the Benue basin, in an area that roughly corresponded to the extent of the kingdom of Kwararafa as it existed in the 18th century. That area of Jukun habitation, Meek noted, was bounded by Abinsi to the west, Kona to the east, Pindiga to the north and Donga to the south.

The language can be divided into six separate dialects: Wukari, Donga, Kona, Gwana and Pindiga, Jibu, and finally Wase Tofa, although Meek noted that the dialects of "Kona, Gwana and Pindiga differ so little that they may be regarded as one."

History Kwararafa: An estimated approximation of the boundaries of the historical Kwararafa, the kingdom from which the modern Jukun claim descent.
The Jukun-speaking peoples trace their ancestry to the rulers of the kingdom of Kwararafa, a state which existed in Western Africa from the 14th through to the 18th centuries. Traditionally, Jukun society was governed by a monarch.

As a result of the Fulani conquests at the beginning of the 19th century, the Jukun-speaking peoples became politically divided into various regional factions. By the 1920s, the main body of the Jukun population, known as the Wapâ, resided in and around Wukari, where they were governed by the local king and his administration. Other Jukun-speaking peoples living in the Benue basin, such as Jukun wanu of Abinsi, Awei District, Donga and Takum, remained politically separate from the Wukari government, and the Jukun-speakers in Adamawa Province recognised the governorship of the Fulani Emir of Muri.

In the post-colonial period, Nigeria has suffered violence, the result of multiple ethnic tensions among the different communities living in the country. Tensions exist between the Jukun and the neighbouring Tiv people, who migrated from Congo.

Jukun, a people living on the upper Benue River in Nigeria, commonly believed to be descendants of the people of Kororofa, one of the most powerful Sudanic kingdoms during the late European Middle Ages. The ruins of a great settlement to the northeast of the Jukun’s present location are thought to be those of the capital of that kingdom, but the claim has not been thoroughly investigated by archaeologists.

The population speak a language of the Benue-Congo branch of the Niger-Congo family. The people comprise a congeries of many smaller groups, each organized on a different basis, although polygynous extended families seem to be the dominant unit.

The Jukun traditionally possessed a complex system of offices, which had both a political and a religious aspect; the priesthood practiced an involved form of religion marked by diurnal and annual rounds of ritual and sacrifice. The king, called Aka Uku, was—until he became a member of northern Nigeria’s house of chiefs in 1947—a typical example of a semidivine priest-king.

The ancient town of Wukari, in the southern part of Taraba state, occupied predominantly by the Jukun tribe is the cradle of the Kwararafa Kingdom with its ancient customs and traditions that have remained sacred to the aborigines since 1596.
For Kwararafa descendants born after 1976, all they must have known about the transition ceremony of their paramount and spiritual leader known as the Aku-Uka must have been tales from those older than them.
But for the few lucky ones who were still resident within Taraba and other adjoining states, the stories they must have heard in their formative years about ‘Pankya’ (Transition Ceremony) of previous ‘Aku-Uka’ (Kings) was what they experienced firsthand last month.

For nearly 50 years, Dr Shekarau Angyu Masa Ibi Kuvyo II, had occupied the exalted throne of the Aku-Uka and had remained the unifying factor of the entire descendants of Kwararafa. He was the 24th Aku-Uka of Wukari and had 13 wives with 68 children, 111 grandchildren and 16 great grandchildren.

However, in October 2021, he joined his ancestors which marked the end of his reign to pave way for a new ruler that would be sent by his forebears to continue from where he stopped.
According to the ancient Jukun tradition which persists till date, an Aku does not die. It is believed that an Aku is immortal and only transmutes to join his ancestors from the shrine of the Jukun people in Puje to a sacred place called ‘Nando’. That is why the transition ceremony is known as Pankya ya Nando (Journey to Nando).
The Horseman as Porter

One significant aspect of the Pankya is the mystery behind the horseman. This has got so many people talking and different commentaries written both on the traditional and social media. The myth behind this age long practice and the fate of the horseman was the topic on the lips of those alien to the Jukun culture. So many questions were asked on the journey of the horseman to Nando as anxiety enveloped some others on the fate of the horseman whose safe return was not guaranteed.

It was said that only the horseman would accompany the deceased paramount ruler strapped on his (horseman) back on top of the horse to the forest of Nando. There were occasions in the past when the horseman never returned after conveying the deceased ruler to Nando. Many narratives equated his journey to a suicide mission but the recent event has proved this wrong when the horseman that conveyed Dr Shekarau Angyu Masa-Ibi Kunvyo II to Nando returned to Wukari on January 17, 2022.

For a Jukun man, the responsibility of conveying the transiting Aku-Uka is seen as an honour. Some people also describe it as an act of service to the Aku who is seen as an intermediary between the terrestrial and celestial. As such, the selected horse rider performs the task with enthusiasm and a sense of responsibility not only to the Jukun people but also as an act of loyalty to the king.

It was gathered that not just anybody can become a horse rider or bearer of a transiting Aku. The horse rider according to their tradition is chosen from a designated group within the Jukun supreme temple. According to Dr Shishi Zhema, an Associate Professor of History and the Head of Department, History and Diplomatic Studies at Federal University Wukari who is also an indigene, the process of selecting the horseman is painstaking and requires ratification from the divine to ensure his safe return from Nando.
He said, “the horse rider is a member of the Jukun supreme temple and belongs to a group in the fold. The selection of the horse rider is not just an arbitrary event. It goes through a process which is done by the Chief priest until the right person is found. If the right person is not picked and sanctioned by the ancestors there is a likelihood he might get to Nando and not return. So, that is why this process of divination has to be carefully followed according to the tradition and if selected, the horse rider’s primary function is to take the Aku-Uka to Nando.

“However, from myths of the tradition, we heard that there were occasions that the person who rode with the Aku-Uka to Nando never returned. But it was discovered that the main reason the rider failed to return was because the ancestors did not sanction him. However, that has since been corrected hence the process involved to ensure that the right person sanctioned by the ancestors conveys the transiting Aku to Nando. Being sanctioned by the ancestors is as good as saying ‘go, we are protecting you and you will come back’. Ever since this process is being diligently followed, there has never been an account from the myth of the tradition that the horse rider never returned,” he said.

Also corroborating this, a Jukun elder and current Commissioner for Information in Taraba state, Mr Danjuma Adamu, affirmed that in all the Pankya that he had witnessed from childhood till the recent one held on January 14, all the horse riders returned safely.

“I have witnessed five different Pankya. The first was in 1960, followed by that of 1970 and then 1974, 1976 and the latest one of 2022. In all, the horse riders successfully returned. This is a tradition we so much cherish and as Jukuns we count it a rare privilege to be among the few ethnic groups that still cherish and preserve their tradition.

“Most of our youths and those within the age range of 45 and below are witnessing this for the first time because the last one before the recent Pankya was done in 1976. That was why the multitude came to witness the transition of the Aku-Uka.

“As for the process involved, including the pre-event and the actual event of the day, nothing has changed. It was done like the old times and that is the beauty of the revered culture of the Kwararafa descents,” he said.

The Journey to Nando: From the Aku-Uka’s Palace to major streets of Wukari, there were multitudes of people, from within and outside Taraba who came to witness the epoch-making transition of the supreme leader of the Jukun race.

A town revered as one of the largest yam markets in central Nigeria, the busy Wukari yam market was devoid of the hustle and bustle. Hoteliers had a busy time as hotel rooms were fully booked while neighbouring towns even hosted some visitors who came to witness the Pankya.

The Jukun traditional attire (Adire) was the major wear of the day. Both young and old were adorned in their colourful traditional wears who were in a long procession from the palace to Puje, the shrine of the Jukun people.
The men dressed like the old times. Their chests were bare while the traditional Adire was tied around their waists. The women on the other hand tied the attire around their chests like wrappers and trekked barefooted in the long procession to Puje.

On arrival, people were seated in clusters on clearly marked places. The were also people on the bare floor awaiting the initiates, the horse rider and the transiting Aku-Uka on a royal horse that would move from there to Nando. The appearance of the horse rider from the shrine signaled the commencement of the journey to Nando and was followed with cheers from the multitude that assembled to witness the colourful Pankya ya Nando.

Reasons why the Tiv and Jukun are in war: Kororofa (Kwararafa in Hausa) was a multiethnic state and/or confederacy centered along the Benue River valley in what is today central Nigeria. It was southwest of the Bornu Empire and south of the Hausa States. They rose to prominence before 1500, were in conflict with their more powerful neighbours in the 17th century, and reduced to a small tribute state by the 18th century. It is believed that Kwararafa was either a confederacy conquest state, led by the modern Jukun people or perhaps a collective name given by their Muslim foes for a number of pagan peoples to their south.

Regardless, a spiritually important pagan Jukun priest-kingship at Wukari appears to have been the centre of Kwararafa power, but in the 17th century, that may have spread much farther. Leo Africanus records a Bornu raid into Kwararafa territory at the end of the 15th century and the resistance of Kwararafa horsemen. They practiced a bureaucratic state of rule and was headed by the Aku whose powers were greatly limited.

The Kano Chronicles among other Hausa sources record successful invasions of Hausaland by the Kwararafa, specifically against Kano around 1600, again in the middle of the century, and another in 1671. In the 1670s the Kwararafa assaulted Katsina, sacked Zaria and launched an invasion of Bornu. Bornu sources recount Kwararafa striking towards the capital of Ngasargamu and being turned aside in a great battle by Mai Ali bin Umar. Katsina chronicler Dan Marina recounts the Mai Ali killing, wounding and capturing many Kwararafa and sending three captives back to their leader, with their ears severed and hung around their necks.

Regardless of the brutality of the relations, there seems to have been a long period of respect between states. During the 18th century, communities of each apparently lived in the cities of the other, and a tradition of Muslim emissaries served the Kwararafa.

Hausa communities too were found in the Kwararafa territory. Still, the state apparently was resolutely pagan and remained so past its decline in the 18th century. By the end of that century, Kwararafa paid tribute to Bornu. By the 19th century they were reduced to small towns, resisting, for a period, the Fulani Jihad of the Sokoto Caliphate.

The successor state, the Wukari Federation, was established around 1840 and remains as a Nigerian traditional state. It remains the only tribe that conquered the Hausa and the most powerful tribe in Nigeria in the 17th century.

Wukari is a Local Government Area in Taraba State, Nigeria, headquarters is in the town of Wukari on the A4 highway. The Donga River flows through the area and the Benue River forms a boundary with Nasarawa State to the northwest. It has an area of 4,308 km2 and a population of 241,546 at the 2006 census. The postal code of the area is 670.
Wukari town is the base of the Wukari Federation, a traditional state. The Wukari local languages are Jukun (Wapan, Jibu, Nyifon etc).

Significant Tiv populations are found in surrounding villages like Tse-Ayu and Toho Abanyon though grossly marginalized due to the age-long Tiv-Jukun conflicts.
